kubeadm component configs KEP update 1 (#1725)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/20190925-component-configs.md

### Stop using component config internal types

As kubeadm will no longer default, validate or migrate component configs inside its code base, the need to use component config internal types is no longer needed. In that case the usage of internal types can be removed. This would also allow us to reduce the number of imported packages and to drop one of the last dependencies on the kubernetes/kubernetes code base.  
The switch is going to be performed by replacing each internal type with a corresponding versioned type. This, by itself, is not going to have any impact on users.

### “kubeadm upgrade plan” changes

As supported component configs are expected to increase in number in the future and some of them might require manual user migration prior to upgrade, an ahead of time notice about what actions are required is a nice thing to have.  
Hence, the `kubeadm upgrade plan` command is going to provide information on the component configs. In particular, if they are managed by kubeadm or are user supplied, and if they need manual upgrade or not.

> In addition to that, `kubeadm upgrade plan` is now also going to support a new flag `--component-config-upgrades` that is going to supply a file with one or more YAML documents in it that overwrite component configs that are too old and cannot be loaded from the cluster.  

Reviewer: `upgrade apply` too / `upgrade` in general?

Only the configs that need upgrading would be loaded from the file supplied with `--component-config-upgrades`. Component configs that don't need version upgrades or kubeadm configuration types will be ignored.  

> The loaded configs, that were supplied with `--component-config-upgrades` would be taken into account when printing the additional component config information.

Reviewer: this is the only new topic, i guess.
i think it's fine other that adding another flag that will be difficult to remove later.
wondering if we should have it prefixed as `--experimental` so that we can have easier deprecation.

my idea was that maybe we should introduce an UpgradeConfiguration that can host:
- potential custom image changes, where the user wants to upgrade their custom etcd to this new custom etcd version.
- component config upgrade.

Author: > this is the only new topic, i guess.

Plus the new alpha commands to make upgrade UX easier.

> i think it's fine other that adding another flag that will be difficult to remove later.
> wondering if we should have it prefixed as `--experimental` so that we can have easier deprecation.

The current flag name is the first thing that came in my mind. Sure, we should prepend `experimental` while this whole UX is still alpha. However...
 
> my idea was that maybe we should introduce an UpgradeConfiguration that can host:
> 
> * potential custom image changes, where the user wants to upgrade their custom etcd to this new custom etcd version.
> * component config upgrade.

... I don't think that embedding component configs in another kubeadm config object is handy or appropriate even. This would result into a massive inconsistency with the init UX where component configs are specified as separate YAML documents (which is the same way kubectl and the rest of the Kubernetes community operates).

I have other reservations towards `UpgradeConfiguration` too, but they are off-topic WRT this PR.

Hence, I don't see any other way than specify a file with YAML documents to `kubeadm upgrade apply`. I didn't want to reuse `--config` though, because that would make our life harder once we try to remove that capability in the future. Plus, it makes a better distinction between the semantic of "using everything there" (that `--config` has) vs "use only what is necessary" (that `--component-config-upgrades` has).

Reviewer: but this is also an inconsistency with `init`, which allows passing component config in a mulit-doc.
i'm leaning towards `--experimental-component-config-upgrade` (singular) and maybe we can make `--config` only used for that.

Author: Actually,
```
In addition to that, `kubeadm upgrade plan` is now also going to support a new flag `--component-config-upgrades` that is going to supply a file with one or more YAML documents in it that overwrite component configs that are too old and cannot be loaded from the cluster.
```

Hence you can specify multiple YAMLs in the same file, but only the needed ones will be used (unneeded stuff will be ignored and this includes kubeadm configs).

Reviewer: marking as resolved.

### "kubeadm upgrade apply" changes

As supported component configs are expected to increase in number in the future and some of them might require manual user migration prior to upgrade, a handy and secure method for supplying new configs is necessary.

For that matter `kubeadm upgrade apply` also gains the same `--component-config-upgrades` flag and with the same semantics as in `kubeadm upgrade plan`.  
In addition to that, the newly used configs, from the file supplied with `--component-config-upgrades`, would be stored in the cluster as user specified configs during the upgrade process.

> ### Introduce the "kubeadm alpha component-configs print-upgradeable" command

Reviewer: an alpha command would mean that it has to graduate into a non-alpha command at some point.

should we use `kubeadm config` as the graduation target? i think having a separate `kubeadm component-configs` is not needed. so why not use e.g. `kubeadm alpha config print-upgradeable`?

Author: That's an interesting question to which I have no definitive answer ATM. I am too inclined to think that the place after graduation should be somewhere under `kubeadm config`.
However, we should make sure that the command refers to component configs specifically.
The whole point of having `print-upgradeable` is because we cannot automatically migrate some component configs. However, we can do this for kubeadm configs (`kubeadm config migrate`).
Hence, having `kubeadm config migrate` and `kubeadm config print-upgradeable`, or even `kubeadm config print upgradeable`, can be confusing to users.

Reviewer: i'm proposing `kubeadm alpha config print ...` for the new alpha command.

Author: For a start, we are only concerned with the `upgrade apply` workflow for now.

1. User runs `kubeadm upgrade plan` and is prompted by the table at the end of it that a component config (or several ones) need manual upgrade.
2. (optional, but useful) User uses `kubeadm alpha component-configs print-upgradeable` to get the contents of upgradeable component configs. This is done for a reference.
3. User runs `kubeadm alpha component-configs print-defaults` to generate defaulted component configs for the current setup in a local file. Then manually edits them in the file to apply his/her own changes.
Alternatively, users may supply the configs in their entirety here in a local file, without using `kubeadm alpha component-configs print-defaults`.
4. (optional) Users re-run `kubeadm upgrade plan --config=<updated-configs-file>` to verify that the table now says that everything is OK.
5. Users continue on the normal upgrade path by using `kubeadm upgrade apply --config=<updated-configs-file>`
The new configs are automatically stored on the cluster upon successful completion of `upgrade apply`.

The rest of the upgrade process stays the same.

Reviewer: i think the workflow is fine. there isn't much that can be done other than allowing them to fetch the defaults / upgradeable and manually edit, for now.

This new command would fetch the YAML documents of any component configs that are in use in the cluster and require manual migration to a newer version prior to cluster upgrade. Then it would print those YAML documents to the standard output or to a file, specified with the `--output` command line option.  

> If there are no configs that need manual upgrade, this command would print nothing.

Reviewer: wondering how would it work under the hood? if the user is using the latest kubeadm 1.Y binary vs kubeadm binary 1.Y-1.
i'm assuming they need to use 1.Y to tell them what has to be upgraded, but how would the 1.Y binary know if the config in the cluster version 1.Y-1 needs an upgrade?

does that mean that the 1.Y binary needs to know about the component config defaults for 1.Y and 1.Y-1, so that it can compare those to the SHA in the 1.Y-1 cluster?

Author: The detection mechanism is not much different than the one used for `kubeadm upgrade plan` (see kubernetes/kubernetes#88124).
In essence, kubeadm would check the groups. If the API group matches, but the version is not the supported one - then the config needs upgrading.
In that case, it's just printed as is (for this particular command).

Hence, you should always use the 1.Y binary.

As for the SHAs - we'll use them to check if a generated config was modified or not.

Reviewer: but the 1.Y binary still needs to know about generated config 1.Y and 1.Y-1, i guess? not that this is much of an issue, as far as i can tell.

Because kubeadm looses its ability to automatically convert an older component config version into a newer one, it is best to start distinguishing between user supplied or user modified component configs and kubeadm generated ones. That way kubeadm generated configs can be thrown out and regenerated when an upgrade is required.

Unfortunately, user supplied or user modified configs would still need to be manually migrated if a config version upgrade is necessary.

To distinguish between user supplied and generated configs, kubeadm shall sign each config map, that contains generated by it config, during cluster upload. If the signature is missing or incorrect during download the config is treated as user supplied.

To calculate the signature of a generated config, kubeadm would prepare the standard `core/v1` config map. Then it would take the `data` section, order the keys lexicographically and then feed the values in that order to a SHA256 digest. After that, the same procedure is repeated for the values in the `binaryData` section too.

> The resulting SHA256 digest is prepended its type - the string `sha256:` and is stored as a value of the `kubeadm.kubernetes.io/autogen-checksum` annotation in the config map object.

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
The resulting SHA256 digest is prepended its type - the string `sha256:` and is stored as a value of the `kubeadm.kubernetes.io/hash` annotation in the config map object.
```
for consistency with `kubeadm.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/hash` (this can be fixed also during implementation)

Author: It was probably a mistake on my part to put it in here in this form. As you said, it's really a nit and this KEP can be retroactively updated with the exact nits once we merge the PR that brings this functionality to kubeadm (kubernetes/kubernetes#86070)

The loaded configs, that were supplied with `--config` would be taken into account when printing the additional component config information.

### "kubeadm upgrade apply" changes

As supported component configs are expected to increase in number in the future and some of them might require manual user migration prior to upgrade, a handy and secure method for supplying new configs is necessary.

For that matter `kubeadm upgrade apply` also gains the same extended semantics of the `--config` flag.  
In addition to that, the newly used configs, from the file supplied with `--config`, would be stored in the cluster as user specified configs during the upgrade process.

### Introduce the "kubeadm alpha config view upgradeable" command

This new command would fetch the YAML documents of any component configs that are in use in the cluster and require manual migration to a newer version prior to cluster upgrade. Then it would print those YAML documents to the standard output or to a file, specified with the `--output` command line option.  

> If there are no configs that need manual upgrade, this command would print nothing.

Reviewer 2: Is it expected that the output of this command can be passed to upgrade plan/apply?

Author: No. The output there is the set of old component configs that cannot be parsed by kubeadm.
The idea behind this command is for cluster admins to have a handy tool with which they can get the current contents of all component configs that need upgrading. That way they can take a note of what was modified by them in the first place and make sure the same changes are taken into account when creating the new component configs to be supplied to `kubeadm upgrade apply`.

On the other hand, the output of `kubeadm alpha config print component-defaults` is expected to be consumable directly by `kubeadm upgrade plan` and `kubeadm upgrade apply`.

> 

Reviewer: re: graduation criteria ^
potentially add a note about graduating the new commands / flags in the Beta stage?

Author: I'll revise the KEP for the beta stage. In fact, I refer to this stage as "alpha 1" and I'll probably do an "alpha 2" one too (once the instance vs shared component configs KEP is in implementable state).
